Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always Ricardo Los. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Vinod go. He's professor
in the Department of Psychology at York University. And
today we're talking about his book, Reason and Less
Pursuing Food, sex and Politics. So, Doctor Goel, welcome
to the show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. I'm pleased to be here.
So I would like to start by asking you
about what rationality is. I mean, how you understand
it because if I ask people from different scientific
disciplines, they would probably have slightly different understandings and
definitions of rationality. But since if I understand it
correctly, of course, you, what you bring into the
book is mostly an evolutionary and the neuroscientific perspective.
What is rationality in this context?
So let me give you a very basic uh
definition of rationality. And this is the definition that
I think everyone needs to agree with. And then
on top of this, they can build their other
more specific definition. So as you know, uh you
know, we are the rational animals, that's how we
define ourselves. That's how Aristotle defined us. And by
this, what we mean is that volitional human behavior
is explained in terms of rationality or in terms
of reason. And so reason, rationality has three components.
Uh It's, if you're gonna build a model of
rationality, you need three things, you need beliefs, you
need uh goals or desires and you need a
principle of coherence. And uh uh when we are
rational, what we do is we select our actions
um to be consistent with our goals, given certain
beliefs. And uh then that's it, that, that's uh
what rationality is. Let me give you a couple
of very quick examples to point out to point
this out. So I'm sitting at my desk here
in front of my computer and there is a
uh a bottle of water on my right hand
side, I'm thirsty and I desire to take a
drink of water. If I reach out to the
right hand side of the table, pick up the
thermos, bring it to my lips and drink, that's
rational, but having the same beliefs and desire that
is a desire to uh drink the water and
the belief that the thermos is on my right
hand side, I reach out to the left hand
side of my desk. That's irrational. Mhm. That, that's
really, you know, uh that's sort of a very
simple example and I can give you, I mean,
a more realistic example um that we might actually,
that might serve some purpose later on. Uh THINK
of um uh parole judges making decisions. OK. This
is a, a rational task. Uh So again, three
components to the model, uh a desire, certain beliefs
and a coherence relation. So the desire in this
case might be something like upholding the law and
protecting society. That's what the judge wants to do.
That's the goal and they may have certain beliefs
and these beliefs will be based on the information
they've been provided about the applicant. So maybe the
information is things like has served the mandatory mendum
was an exemplary prisoner is not likely to reoffend
and there's no objecting statement from the victim. And
so given those the des desire and those beliefs,
you bring those together with the coherence relation and
there is a certain uh uh decision or action
that follows grant or uh uh not grant uh
parole. And that essentially is uh the uh uh
uh at the core of models of uh uh
of reasoning. And the um uh but the problem
with these models is that um they fall short
and then, um uh I mean, and, and iii
I can illustrate this uh uh for you with
a um uh with an example that uh really
had a profound effect upon me. This is an
example uh from 2021 this was an interview that
Francis Collins who was then the head of the
NIH. So he was the head of the NIH
for 12 years. He was stepping down in 2021
and December 2021 and he was interviewed by a
reporter and she asked him, well, uh you know,
what are some of the successes and regrets of
your t 12 year tenure? And among the successes,
he noted a number of significant advances in biomedical
research, but among his regrets what he said, and
I, I, let me, let me actually read this
to you. What he said is to have now
60 million people still holding off, taking advantage of
life saving vaccines is pretty unexpected. It does make
me at least realize boy, there are things about
human behavior that I don't think we had invested
enough into understanding. So what he's saying is not
that these models uh need to be tweaked or
he's saying we missed the ballpark on this in
terms of our models of uh uh uh human
behavior. And I came to a similar realization uh
some uh 56 years ago uh when uh I,
I've been working on um sort of the neural
basis of uh human rationality for 20 plus years
at the time. And it seemed to me that
uh uh nothing that I knew was relevant to
explaining the behavior of my teenage daughter or my
Trump neighbors in Florida who profess an unshakable faith
in American exceptionalism. But then go on to deny
and ridicule the signs of climate change emerging from
exceptional American institutions, uh or why intelligent powerful men
engage in sexual indiscretion, even assault at great personal
risk and to themselves and harm to others. Uh
WHY I overindulge in chocolate cake and pizza. So,
um uh so while the model is very simple
and it's ubiquitous in some sense, we can't, you
know, this is uh even in the absence of
any uh uh formal uh you know, knowledge of
psychology or decision making. So this is how we,
you know, this is how we predict each other's
uh uh behavior. But um and this is, you
know, and our uh formal models, uh and this
is where you'll get the difference as you, as
you mentioned at the beginning, when you ask the
question that if you ask the three different people,
what is rationality? If they're giving you a definition
based on their formal model, this is where you,
the differences will arise. Um And um and these
differences are largely um uh the, the, they know
they largely result from the fact that uh we
have to a uh uh we have to account
for the failures of the model and the differences
are, you know, how do we account for the
differences? And usually we just account for the differences
by assuming rationality, but then placing certain constraints on
it, like heuristics and biases fast and slow, motivated
reasoning, sloppy, reasoning, pure education, you know, and so
forth. Um And uh so these are just largely
just uh uh cognitive tweaks that try to save
us from irrationality. Yeah. And so my own concern
uh in the book has not been so much
with irrational behavior, but which is the failure of
coherence, but rather with irrational behavior, which I define
as behavior driven or modulated by non rational systems.
So that's really what I've uh um become interested
in. And again, if you like, I can give
you a simple example of this based on the
previous example I gave of the parole judges in
making the decision. And so that, that's a rational
task, right? This is the reasoning mind at work.
There's a famous study by Dan Zinger at all
from 2011 in which he studied these, you know,
a number of pro judges making decisions. And what
he reported is when, when the, when the pro
judges were well fed after a good meal, uh
the favorable pro rating uh rulings were about 65%.
But prior to a food break, when they were
hungry, the favorable ratings dropped to zero. And so
the reasoning mind can't explain this, right? It it
can say it's noise, it's this or that, but
it can't really explain this. And so the only
way you can explain this is presumably it has
something to do with low blood sugar level. And
so you need a model whereby uh these non
reasoning systems can actually interact with reasoning systems. Uh
So, mhm
A and uh let me ask you a, a
different kind of questions still rationality related. So how
does rationality relate to other aspects of human cognition?
Like the emotions? I mean, what role do emotions
play in? I guess we could say, informing how
we make decisions? And so how do they relate
to rationality?
OK. OK. So traditionally, emotions and reason or rationality
have been contrasted, right? That they belong to two
different worlds. And here there's a quote from Seneca
that I use in my lectures to my students
that I think is brilliant. And I, I I'm
going to make a note of it here and
I'm going to read it to you. He said
some tw 2000 years ago, Reeves and herself, to
whom the reins of power had been entrusted remains
mistress. Only so long as she was kept apart
from the passions. If once she mingles with them
and is contaminated, she becomes unable to hold back
those whom she might have cleared from her path
for when once the mind has been aroused and
shaken, it becomes the slave of the disturbing agent,
right? And so this is sort of guided our
uh uh approach to reason and emotions. Now, the
thing is we still, uh we were, I think
we're, most of us are still uh uh wanting
to separate them. But there is, I mean, if
you just look at the uh sort of that
I, I gave you the definition of emotions, emotions,
uh beliefs and desires and coherence, relationships. Uh So,
beliefs and desires are intentional states right there. Um
So, emotions also have intentional states. Uh So, for
example, if I am, uh if I am uh
fear, well, it's fear of something, I mean, a
fear of snakes, right? So the, so the, the,
the uh the, the they are referential just like
uh uh the, the states involved in reason, Uh
they also have cognitive antecedents. So that is that
um uh I might uh come to the belief
that it is raining outside. Uh If I see
my wife walk in with her umbrella, shaking the
water off of it so that, you know, that
results in that. But where they differ from the
types of uh uh intentional states that we uh
uh we typically implicate when we're talking about reason
is that they also have a valence, physiological arousal
and temporal duration. And this is so typically, I
mean, the idea is beliefs uh uh uh uh
uh and desires don't have this, I take exception
to that I think they do. But the traditional
story is they don't so ve you know, um
uh so emotions can be positive or negative. Fear
is negative. Uh YOU know, uh seeing an old
friend, uh the happiness, the warmth you feel is
positive arousal is the level of positive or negative.
Um uh TEMPORAL duration is how long it lasts.
There are also physiological expressions associated with emotions, like
facial expressions, um uh their action tendencies. Um So
happiness um would make you want to approach um
fear, withdraw, anger, strike out at the other, in
uh uh strike at the other individual. So there
is this overlap uh between uh emotions and reason.
Um THOUGH, as I've said, we've um we want
to sort of uh um pull them apart. Uh
Yeah. And um uh I, so this is something
I think as the field we're still struggling with.
Uh
mhm uh IS struggling with understanding exactly what is
the ratio uh the relationship between reason and rationality
and emotions.
Yes, because the uh as I said, several of
the components are the same and we can. So
uh so the reason, so what, what the struggle,
what the, the the challenge is, is uh uh
you can reason regarding your fears about snakes regarding,
you know, uh if you're uh if you're afraid
of snakes, you believe there are snakes outside, then
you don't go outside. That's rational, that is very
consistent with the uh um the, you know, the
definition of uh uh reason I provided earlier. But
the issue arises is uh what is the contribution,
what is the effect on behavior when you have
val uh arousal uh uh involved and the, the
uh iii I think what, what the uh the
involvement of these uh affective components to these uh
psychological states, what they do is they um uh
they are there because they are associated with certain
action tendencies. They may be uh allow for the
bypassing of uh the rational response. I mean, uh
I think there's a story something like that to
be told here
a and so related to that uh in the
book, you talk about this concept of the uh
te rationality and later on, we're going to come
back to this concept but to talk about the
mind more generally. But uh now at this point,
uh could you tell us what the tehr rationality
is?
Yes, so tendered rationality. So this is the idea
that while we are reasoning animals, our system of
reason does not float of the biology. It's not
powered by angel dust. It evolved on top of
it and is integrated into the neurology. We share
with our common ancestors with bats and baboons. So
our reasoning mind is tethered to evolutionary older systems
such as the autonomic system, the instinctive system and
systems. And so volitional human behavior on the traditional
account is a function of the rational mind on
the tethered rationality account. Volitional human behavior is a
blended response of reasoning and non reasoning systems. OK.
And I think this follows uh this sort of
a truism. It follows from the theory of evolution
and the 150 years of neurobiology. Uh And I
also think this tethering is not a flaw to
be ignored as noise or a finer grain question.
We come back to another day. It's uh fundamental
to understanding uh how the human mind works, how
human behavior, uh how we explain human behavior. Um
And I, I can give you a, an everyday
example to illustrate the tethered mind at work. The,
um um you know, a few, couple of years
ago, I had a colleague who, who was, he
was into boating and he was looking to buy
a new boat and he was flipping through the
pamphlet uh uh of the uh of the boats.
And um in each of the pictures, there was
the picture of the boat and there was a
picture of an attractive woman uh in a bikini.
And I asked him, does the woman come with
the boat? And so the point is why is
we know that the woman doesn't come with the
boat? Why is the woman there? Well, it has
to do with the, the, the, the, the, the
way our minds are structured. So the uh uh
because it's mostly men that buy boats. Uh uh
uh YOU know, uh we are wired in such
a way. We like looking at attractive women, the
instinctive mind. Uh So it, this is something that
gets us to look the and so associating putting
the woman beside the boat, this the associative mind.
So we like, you know, this positive. So the
boat gets a positive connotation from that. Thirdly, we
know the woman doesn't come with the boat. So
the reasoning mind knows this. But nonetheless, the uh
given the instinctive and social mind, I it is
worth it. It works, right. So, advertisers know it
works. This is why they spent millions of dollars
doing this. If uh it didn't work, they wouldn't
pay the models to be in the pictures. So,
uh this is, you know, a sort of a
very simple example, everyday example of the tethered minded
work uh in all advertising, uh we're appealing to
factors. Uh We're appealing to recently factors. Sometimes we
list the ingredients on a particular product or that.
But there, there are these other factors, the, you
know, associative mind, instinctive mind, uh autonomic systems um
uh that we're appealing to when you go to
a uh uh a movie theater and sometimes they
will uh at least in North America, they will
uh uh pump the smell of popcorn, buttered popcorn
into the theater, right? That's the autonomic system angry
you go buy popcorn. So we all know this.
But um in our formal models, we uh we
sort of uh uh ignore it, we think, you
know, we have to explain it just with the
reasoning mind so that the mi the tethered mind
is the idea that um uh the all of
these systems have a role to play in uh
behavior that it's a blended response of these various
systems.
Uh But there, in your answer, you mentioned uh
34, actually different systems, the autonomic, instinctual, the associative
and the reasoning system. So, rationality or reasoning, we've
already talked a lot about. But of course, the
example you gave there are the examples are very
illustrative. But could you tell us a little bit
more about what exactly are these systems? The autonomic,
the instinctual and the associative systems and perhaps how
you approach them from the perspective of neuroscience and
how they relate to one another, by the way.
Yeah. Yeah. So these are systems that have been
studied for the past 100 years, the autonomic instinctive
and associative systems and we actually know a great
deal about them both at the uh sort of
psychological level. Uh AND at the uh neurological level.
So the autonomic system is the most basic, it's
a system that uh uh we and nonhuman animals,
we all have its goal, its function is to
monitor and control internal behavior. So think of digestion,
think of blood sugar monitoring, think of breathing, think
of your heart beating. Uh Thi this is the
autonomic system and it um um it does this
and in terms of uh um you know, we
we it's the most of this wiring is in
the brain stem and diencephalon is a very low
level uh uh neural structure. The system is obviously
innate, you don't learn to breathe or to uh
digest. And there is a very sort of tight
um causal coupling between the, the um you know,
the stimulus and the response and the um um
the other systems. Uh I think so, the economic
uh instinctive system now. So with the economic system,
so the key was that it regulates monitors and
regulates the internal environment with the instinctive and associative
and reasoning systems, therefore, monitoring and controlling or regulating
the external environment. So the um um so let
me say a couple of words about instincts. So
instincts has become a dirty word banned from psychology
and Polite Society. Uh This was not always the
case in the 19 twenties. Um uh You know,
if you go back and read some of the
classic uh psychology textbooks uh by mcdougall and at
all, it was front and center in terms of
explaining human behavior. It wasn't, that's not all human
behavior is, but it was recognized that the just
like other animals, we have uh uh this component
to our behavior and instincts are usually defined, they're
considered to be innate. Uh They're usually species or
sex and gender specific. Uh THEY'RE stereotype behaviors. Uh
They can be available from birth or within some
sort of developmental windows and they're triggered by specific
stimuli uh mostly hardwired in some cortical systems. Uh
And again, they're tight causal connection between stimulus and
response. So examples are nest building in birds, the
second response in mammals. Now, these are uncontroversial examples,
these two. But again, uh we could also have
other examples. Um I could say uh territorial response,
gender related behaviors. Now, when I say this, if
I'm talking about wolves, you, there is no problem.
Uh If I'm talking about humans, now there is
an uproar and, but instead of an uproar, we
have actually a question, I think we, uh so
when we territorial response in humans, for example, when
we shout, build that wall, build that wall is
the same mechanism that's responsible. Is there overlap between
that mechanism and what's going on in wolves and
other territorial animals. But uh i it's a question,
uh gender related behaviors. Uh Again, we accept them
in nonhuman animals. And as you know, it's very,
very contentious in uh uh in humans. But again,
it's a um um it's a legitimate uh uh
uh question to ask. And my own view of
these latter behaviors is that uh there is a
uh a instinctive component, but we also have a
reasoning mind. And so they, they get, they can
be modulated to some extent uh one way or
the other. And, but unfortunately that these days it's
a um uh it's a minority position because most
social scientists, most, I mean, society is la at
large. Uh We've sort of somehow come to the
conclusion that um uh humans no longer need to
rely on instincts to survive. Uh BECAUSE we have
education, technology and social norms that somehow they supersede
uh uh uh you know, our instincts and our
instincts go away. Uh No that's not uh uh
uh uh uh the case. Um AND William James
uh knew better, I think uh uh than many
modern uh uh uh uh psychologists and social scientists.
And, uh but again, as I say, give whether
a particular behavior is instinctive or not, uh is
uh can be a complex question. It's not, uh
you know, it's, it's not trivial like an autonomic
system we can identify and we don't really argue
about is this an autonomic function or not or
you know, but with instincts, yes, we do. Uh
So I personally use a uh sort of a
uh uh five question scale, you know, to determine
whether something should fall on the instinctive side or
the social norm side.
OK. So tell us about that. Uh Those five
questions.
OK. So is the trait in question? Is it
present in all human species or sorry, all human
societies? Uh Are there variants of it on other
branches of the phylogenetic tree? Can we see it,
you know, a little some variation of it on
monkeys and apes? Uh Does it emerge early in
human infants prior to any opportunity for extensive socialization?
Uh Four. Is it underwritten by implicit autonomic low-level
mechanisms? Uh Five. Is there a dedicated neural circuitry?
So my idea is if you answer yes to
most of these questions, then that trade or that
behavior is gonna fall on the instinctive side if
you answer no to them to most of them,
it's gonna fall on the social norm, learned side.
Yeah.
Yeah. Uh, I think, let me just comment and
please, if you disagree, tell me. But I guess
that, uh, uh, to a great extent, I understand
the issue that many people nowadays have with the
term instinct because, uh, I mean, at least, I
guess the way it was conceptualized, uh, earlier when
people still talked about instincts, it sounded as if
the instincts corresponded to behaviors that were completely impermeable
to environmental inputs to things like learning, culture, your
reasoning even, I mean, that it was basically something
that was inborn and where whenever we were exposed
to particular kinds of stimuli, the output, the behavioral
output would always be the same. And nowadays, for
example, of course, as I mentioned, there, there's a
big debate uh talking about different kinds of behaviors
to what extent they are the result of the
environment or if they are more innate or not.
I mean, we still use the word innate and
we talk about psychological predispositions for example. But I
guess that is, that's the main worry there that
perhaps by using the word instinct, you're pointing to
something that is completely, that is inborn and completely
impermeable to any sort of uh environmental inputs to
any sort of modification by learning reasoning or some
other mechanism. Do you think that's fair to say
yes. But I don't think so. You're correct in
uh uh in pointing out this is how people
sort of con uh conceive of instincts and this
is why the push back against them. But I
think the, uh it's uh erroneous to think of
instincts like an automatic reaction as uh like a
reflex arc. Now in the tw uh in the
19 twenties, uh we did think of instincts as
reflex arcs as a complex series of reflex arcs.
But because they could be the, the, there, there
are certain exceptions, you can get a behavior in
the absence of a stimuli or you can have
the stimuli and not get the behavior. So this
occurs. And so to accommodate this, the mo you
know, that we had to change our model of
instincts. And so I like to think of instincts
as sort of compulsive behaviors. You're sort of compelled
to do this and um that there is this
compulsion but whether it can be overridden or whether
one can take steps to uh prevent it is
a uh is an open question. It depends on
the model. So let, let me give you an
example, a non-controversial example. Um uh YOU know, you
have a pet dog, you teach that dog to
walk at your heel and uh you, you, you
know, you use operant conditioning to do that associative
learning and uh you say heel and the dog
will walk at your heel and you can walk
along, you know, the road uh with this dog.
And uh the dog wanders off, you say he
again and again, the dog will walk about, a
squirrel runs out in front of the dog. Now,
in certain cases, now that to chase that squirrel
is an instinctive behavior or chase that rabbit, you
know, it's an instinctive behavior. So the uh the
dog might take off after that rabbit or it
may be well enough trained that it can resist
that compulsion to do so. So, II I like
this, I say so it's not like a reflex.
Ar no, you see the rabbit, you go off,
you know the dog go goes. No, the dog
can um dog may well do that. But um
uh iii I it may not depend on how
well it's trained. Yeah.
Mhm I understand. So we've already talked here about
coherence when I asked you about what rationality is
according to the framework you bring into the book.
So uh in the subtitle of the book, you
refer to food, sex and politics. So why those
three things specifically? Why do you focus on those
33 different things?
Yes. So uh yeah. So pursuing food, sex and
politics and by politics, what I mean is negotiating
and maintaining power, alliances within and across social groups.
OK. And so these are the three things that
are essential for survival without success in these areas.
We do not survive as a species. And so
the subtitle actually that I began with was different
the subtitle was originally, uh, you know, uh, model
of tethered rationality for real world behavior or something.
However, when I completed the book, it occurred to
me and this, I wasn't aware of this as
I was writing it, it occurred to me that
most of my examples were about food, sex and
politics. The illustrations that I used to, uh, uh,
in the book. And I think what's going on
here is that while tethering is apparent in all
behaviors and for example, think back to the uh
uh uh parole judges, example, uh it comes through
particularly strongly in adaptive behaviors. So it's easy to
recognize the tethering in adaptive behaviors that is behaviors
uh uh uh pursuing food sex and politics. So
that's the uh the, the, the reason uh for
the subtitle.
Mhm A and uh going back to a little
bit to the froth mind. So we've already talked
about the hierarchy of evolved behaviors, autonomic, instinctive associative
and reasoning behaviors. So, could you tell us about
how the taro mind uh develops? Exactly.
Mhm. So I think it's just a natural by-product
of brain evolution. Mhm So what, what I mean
by this is uh if we look at uh
the uh how brains evolve. So, vertebrate brains consist
of a spinal cord brain stem, diencephalon, subcortical structures
and a cortex. And what's interesting is that at
every branch of the phylogenetic tree, certain of these
brain structures are conserved while others are added, modified
and expanded new directions. And what's interesting is that
there are also behaviors that are preserved at certain
branching points while others are added modified and expanded.
And so I, I think there is this correspondence
between anatomy and behavior I don't think is an
accident. Harly organized behaviors are underwritten by Harly organized
brain structures. Uh So for example, if we look
at um uh I, I mean, it need not
be a human, could be uh any mammal brain.
So, brain stem uh uh autonomic systems, uh uh
pathways for conducting sensory information, including pain and pleasure,
uh diencephalon, major real uh relay center for sensory
information. Uh ALSO uh uh sort of homeostatic functions
uh and essential survival functions. Uh SURVIVAL behaviors are
controlled in the hypothalamus. Um uh Subcortical structures, instinctive
behaviors are uh controlled there. The hippocampus lays down
associated memories and then in terms of cerebral cortex,
uh we associate that with higher level uh functions.
And so the idea is that these are being
added, uh you know, these additional behaviors are being
added along with these structures. And when I say
hierarchy, you know, think about this, the uh there
was no uh uh organism that we know of
that has a cortex but no subcortical structures, right?
They uh they do appear in this particular hierarchy
and there's these behaviors associated with them. So that's
my sort of point. But the other thing and
uh we recognize this uh certainly when we're talking
about physiology, but we forget it when we're talking
about reasoning is that um all of these systems,
uh I mean, I do describe them as these
distinct systems. Uh They are uh tethered physically, uh
you know, connected to each other and they interact
with each other. So even something simple as uh
wiggling my little finger, it involves all of these
systems. So, cerebral cortex, thalamus, basal ganglia, brain stem
spinal cord, you know, uh and so forth. Uh
So this is the sort of the, the idea
of the tethered mind that we've got sort of
these brain structures from brain stem diencephalon, subcortical structure,
uh cortex. And we can even sort of talk
about them as having different neuronal properties. Um YOU
know, colloquially, we, these are not good terms, but
we use the terms hardwired and soft wired. And
then we there's a mapping of these different brain
structures onto the different systems that I, you know,
that I talk about uh autonomic systems, uh instinctive
systems, associative and reasoning. And then there is this
issue of uh interacting with the organism interacting with
the world. So the world is impinging upon all
of these systems, but it's not, but the organism
is not giving four different response. There's got to
be some sort of integration function that uh takes
the uh so as the organi as these different
systems are responding to the environment, uh they're generating
certain responses there is some sort of integration function
that takes these and then generates a sort of
a blended response uh uh to them. So I
think this is how at the sort of developmental
uh uh uh uh how the um um the,
the, the tethered rationality comes about the, the tethered
brain comes about
and what are feelings exactly? And what role do
they play in this framework?
OK. Yeah. So in the book, I emphasize feelings,
I talk a great deal about feelings. They play
a central role for me rather than emotions. So
feelings span the range of sensations from the kink
in my neck, the warmth of sunshine on my
face, hunger, pangs, taste of chocolate cake, sexual arousal,
and pangs of jealousy and anger, which are emotional
states. OK? So the idea is feelings are not
emotions though emotional states have feelings. So it's a
very, so feelings refer to the affective component of
um Ooo of mental states. And for me, they
play a central role because uh iii I think
that uh I'm claiming that feelings act as antecedents
to behavioral outcomes. So many people will argue that
feelings are just Ehe nomen. I I am I'm
giving you a very different kind of argument I'm
seeing. For example, hunger pangs initiate food finding and
eating behavior in me. The burning sensation in my
hand causes me to withdraw it from a flame.
Without the hunger pains or burning sensation. The behavior
uh would not uh a a occur. And so
the, the role that feelings are playing is that
they are uh uh the lingua franca uh of
uh these various systems. And uh they're, they're absolutely
critical in uh generating the blended response. And the
reason I uh iiiii I think this is the
case is that feelings are generated in sort of
brains stemmed, encephalon, subcortical structures. If they were not,
if they were generated in the cortex, then I
couldn't tell the story. But uh these uh the
brainstem encephalon, they've appear very early and they've been
conserved certainly in mammals and perhaps all vertebrates. And
so they're available widely, you know, along the phylogenetic
tree. And if you look at a mouse brain
and a human brain and you identify these systems
in the mouse brain, they're the same areas in
the human brain. If you stimulate a particular uh
you know, the system in a mouse brain, for
example, the septal nucleus or something, uh It was
a septal nucleus, the mouse likes it wants to
do it again. If this is done in humans,
obviously for clinical reasons, rather than an experiment situation,
the human likes it. And he can describe to
you uh uh wwwww what? Um uh III I
it feels like. So because of this, you know,
this type that there's uh uh there's no knockdown
argument for the causal efficacy of feelings, but there's
evidence uh from the neuroscience literature for their causal
role such things as um uh so as I've
already said, feelings are generating brain stem structures. Um
uh When feeling circuits are artificially stimulated, the animal
will work to maintain the stimulation. So you can
use that stimulation uh as a reward to condition
the animal's behavior. Just like you would use food.
The animals will develop place preference or aversion. As
a result of stimulation, animals will work harder, run
faster, the more pleasurable they find the stimulation. And
so uh nature is not prodigal yet, feeling circuits
have been preserved despite the heavy metabolic cost. So
there must be some adaptive function. And I argue
in the book that uh what the function is
feeling our evolution solution, uh They're the proximal mechanism
that we use evolution is used for selecting and
initiating uh actions. So, in that sense, they're caly
efficacious and I can walk through an example if
you like or um
yeah, let me just ask you one particular kind
of question about feelings because feelings, if I understand
it correctly have a conscious component to them. Yes.
Right. It has to do with what we actually
phenomenological, let's say experience the things we report experiencing
consciously. So uh when you say that feelings have
the causal power, are you also implying that uh
consciousness as causal power as well or not?
OK. So that's a good question. And it's a
question that I go to great lengths to avoid.
In the book, the Uh OK, thank you. The
Y Yeah, I mean, you're right to note that
this is exactly where this is going. And uh
but delving into the consciousness literature, I sort of,
I, I realized it would be a rabbit hole
that I could never get out of. And so
I give a very sort of functional definition uh
oo of feelings. I used it in the same
sense that uh neuroscientists working with animal models uh
uh uh use it. So the uh and maybe
this can be illustrated in this example that uh
uh uh that I've been uh uh giving. So,
you know, how do we determine uh what to
eat? And uh yeah. So the um uh you
know, our energy management choices uh well, the so
to manage our food reserves, the two things we
have to select what to eat and when to
eat, right? So, feelings of reward that is wanting
and liking in a version discussed serve as intervening
variables between stimulus and response. That's what I'm saying.
So sweetness signals, fast releasing carbohydrate energy sources, motivates
consumption. Uh THE taste and texture of fat signals
high energy density, uh high density energy sources and
also motivates consumption. But bitterness signals the presence of
noxious toxins and poisons and inhibits uh we uh
consumption, we avoid it. So in it's in this
sense, the taste is the sort of interface and
guardian between the external environment of potential foods and
our internal bodily environment. And the second half of
it is the um uh is, is, is the
idea that um um so this is why I
choose to eat chocolate cake and not bitter. Uh
Something is bitter but why should I bother? Why
should I make the effort to eat? Right. Um
Well, there's a homeostatic signal system that signals this
time to eat by generating hunger, pangs, restless, unpleasant
agitating feelings which, you know, you want to get
rid of. And so these feelings are drivers, motivators
inhibitors, they activate certain action tendencies which result in
uh me uh undertaking the actions to procure and
uh you know, food and eat it. Uh So
it's in this sort of very uh basic sense
that I'm claiming that they're uh uh caly efficacious,
I understand. And so another question that you explore
in the book is whether there's a control structure
for tatro rationality. So uh is there actually a
control structure for it? And what does a control
structure mean specific? OK. In that case?
OK. Before I talk about the control structure, um
if you can let me make a couple of
more points here, uh then it will make more
sense to uh talk about the control structure. So
I, I've been talking about feelings and uh and
when I look at the uh sort of 100
years research in autonomic systems, instinctive systems and social
systems, the message seems to be that to, to
model uh these systems, uh you need a notion
of feelings, we have feelings of a causal uh
uh uh uh efficacy. The A a and again,
this is not an uncontroversial claim. You will find
many people argue exactly the opposite. But uh uh
I think there is evidence for even the behaviorist
who, you know, spent their, you know, their whole
lives uh uh avoiding any talk of uh mental
states. Even they cannot explain reinforcement in a non
circular way without having the animal distinguish positive and
negative balance and prefer the positive to the negative.
Uh OK. So what I'm noticing is that feelings
are this common sort of currency across these systems.
But when we talked about reason earlier, we never
talked about feelings, right? When we reason, you know,
a again, like just like emotions and reason are,
are apart, feelings and emo reason are even further
apart. And one of the things sort of the
sort of the controversial move that I make, I
mean, arguing that uh uh feelings or classifications is
a controversial move. That's my first controversial move. The
second controversial move is to argue that reasoning is
also about feelings. OK. So this is a very
different way of looking at reasoning. And the um
and so the idea here is so reasoning, the
model had three components, desires, beliefs and coherence relations.
Uh And I argue that each of these components
uh um have are about feeling. So uh for
example, desires are just cognitive versions of these, you
know, the uh wanting and seeking systems that the
uh neuroscientists who study uh animal models study, you
know, like Burbridge Kendle Bach, um pe uh they're
just cognitive versions, they just, they, they propositional attitudes,
uh beliefs. I think one can make the same
argument for. And I think John Searle's Chinese room
argument uh takes us in that direction but also
coherence. And I argue that all logical intuitions come
down to a feeling of rightness and coherency feels
right, positive violence in coherency or inconsistency feels wrong.
And let me give you a um example to
illustrate that. Uh SO suppose I give you a
uh uh the following proposition, either Socrates is mortal
or it's not the case that Socrates is mortal.
And I ask you, is it true or false?
Well, you will say that it's true. But if
I don't see it, if I can't see the
truth of it, so I don't accept it. I
said, well, can you prove it to me that
it's true? Well, sure, you can uh in classical
logic, you uh bring out the uh principle of
the excluded middle and say, look, this is why
it's true. But if I don't understand the principle
of the excluded middle, if I refuse to accept
it as you can, you prove that to me
what you do, there is no further proof. The
principle is meant to be self evident it's accepted
because it feels right. Right. And so it's in
this sense, I also want to ground my model
of reasoning of rationality in these feelings of rightness.
And why should it feel right? Uh uh In
coherency feels wrong, why? Well, for the same reason,
as in the case of the taste, um, the
feeling is fitness, enhancing, coherency feels good because representations
that are internally consistent and veridical will enhance survival
and coherence is unpleasant because it can be harmful.
So, so then, uh so I've got this, uh
uh now this model with the different components and
uh and a common currency. And again, this is
a very controversial move. Um But it's when I
present this uh to my uh colleagues uh in
the reasoning world. Um uh I discussed it with,
with a number of them and uh they're intrigued,
you know, this is interesting that they're intrigued. Uh
uh uh uh IT'S not, I'm not saying they're
sold but they're intrigued by it. So there's something
there, I think. So from here, then we can
go to the, the, the question you asked about
control structures. So who's in charge of the tethered
mind? Now, what's interesting here or important here? And
this is my third controversial move. There is no
central executive, there's no one on top sitting uh
and saying, OK, no, this system should uh have
activated, this system should have precedent or this. No,
it's not a deal. Mechanism account. And in fact,
I go back to the 18 fifties and pull
out an idea from uh Jeremy Bentham, uh Bentham,
uh you know, was a utilitarian philosopher. You will
recall. And he said that nature has placed mankind
under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and
pleasure. And so this is my control structure. So
my idea is that um the system is set
up to maximize pleasure and minimize pain or displeasure.
There's no executive function, uh no executive in charge,
the selected behavior will be a blended response based
on the output of some or all of the
systems. Uh REASONING system has an input into the
response. But so do the other systems. And we
can, on this type of model, we can explain
individual differences in behavior in terms of individual differences
at the level of reasoning, but also individual differences
at the level of instinctive and associative. And we
can think of this utility function that uh uh
uh takes in the input from the different uh
modules uh uh the different systems and generates a
blended response as the kind of utility function postulated
again by Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill about
100 50 175 years ago. I it was a
measure of pleasure or satisfaction. And I think uh
I mean, it's been taken in a very different
direction by modern economists. And I take exception with
their um uh uh you know, with their uh
development of it. III I think uh Jeremy Bentham
and John Stuart Mill were on to something. And
so they were proposing uh this type of uh
model as a normative model in terms of how
we should uh make decisions. I am proposing it
as a descriptive model is how the system is
actually organized, what the architecture is,
right? So getting into the last part of our
conversation, I would like to understand a little bit
more about the what are pro probably the main
implications of the sta through mind framework. And uh
I mean, one specific question is, and you mentioned
this when earlier in our conversation, you talked or
gave some examples in the realm of politics, particularly
when you mentioned uh why certain people for from
certain political ideologies, find it so hard to believe
that climate change is real, for example. So why
is it so hard to change certain beliefs? And
basically what are the constraints on belief revision?
OK. OK. Yeah. So this is a uh uh
very uh very good question and it's a question
that we as a field as a discipline uh
struggle with. So because the whole the part of
the definition of beliefs is that it's changeable, it
can be revised, right? I if something can be
right, technically, it's not a belief. So it's problematic.
Um So the, the answer to this question from
the tethered rationality account is the pleasure derived from
maintaining coherence of beliefs is overridden or overpowered by
the pleasure derived from exercising some non cognitive system.
That's sort of the answer. And I can illustrate
this answer for you with an example. Uh uh
WE can use uh vaccine hesitancy as an example
because it was um uh I mean, this was
the issue that was uh raised earlier when I
quoted uh uh Francis Collins at the beginning. And
so here, what the issue is, millions of people
refuse to get a vaccine in the midst of
a pandemic. Now, if we're dealing with the untethered
rational mind, that is just a purely rational mind.
How do you change this behavior? You change beliefs
and how do you change beliefs? You educate people,
you provide people with more informative, you know, uh
uh accurate, scientifically valid information, but it didn't work
for one third of Americans and I'm sure it
didn't work for one third of people from a
any different countries. Nothing to do with Americans. Um
And so what's going on here? How do we
explain this? What is, you know, does the reasoning
mind have a role here or if so, what
is it? Well, how do I arrive at the
conclusion that vaccination is the rational choice in the
midst of a pandemic? Well, unless I'm a specialist
in vaccines and viruses, all I can do is
follow the advice of the specialist. So I think
the the reasoning task here for me is to
determine who to believe about vaccine safety and efficacy.
Do I believe the Entertainers reading scripts on TV?
Uh What I find on the internet, my next
door neighbor who had a very strong opinion about
it, or the specialist at the CDC, um who
spent their lives studying viruses and vaccines. And this
is an appropriate question for the reasoning mind, but
the untethered reasoning mind is a myth, you know,
is what I argue um uh here and in
the book, uh and so there are some other
non cognitive processes that work here and the non
cognitive processes that work here. It's an instinct, it's
the in group out group instinct. And so let
me take a minute to talk about uh in
group out group instincts and I'll come back and
then show you how they fit into the explanation.
So we all accept the uh the the in
group out for uh group phenomenon. The in group
is good and safe, the out group is evil
and dangerous. Now, I uh most uh social scientists
want to say that this is a social construction.
I make the case that in group out group
formation is an instinct based on the five, you
know, questions we went through earlier. And uh I
think about it like this, think about it like
imprinting in certain words, uh like geese, uh goslings
will uh uh imprint upon the first moving object
that they see as their mother and follow it.
Uh So the imprinting is instinctual, but what is
imprinted upon is an accidental feature of the environment.
Similarly, in, in group out group formation, the in
uh that's an instinct. But the group membership, the
group that you act, you know, the groups you
belong to is environmentally socially part of uh uh
instincts that I want to emphasize here. I already
mentioned earlier when we talked about instincts, but is
the fact that they're compulsive, they're not uh reflex
arc or robot like. And by being compulsive, it
means that they contain an element of um um
appetite or aversion. And so an appetite is a
uh uh is a state of uh of agitation
uh in the absence of a certain stimuli. So
if you uh hunger pangs in the absence of
food or craving for group membership and you know,
and then receiving the stimuli, food or membership is
consummatory or very pleasurable uh and relieve the agitation
and returns the animal to rest. An aversion is
a state of agitation resulting from the presence of
a certain stimulus. So a spider, in the case
of my daughter will do a threat presented by
the out group and I it ceases when the
stimulus is withdrawn uh or destroyed. And so group
membership contains both uh appetitive state and aversion. So
there is two sources of pleasure and this is
absolutely critical to understand because the um it explains
both the compulsiveness of group formation and the pleasure
derived from belonging to the in group. And this
is the scary part, even the greater pleasure derived
from hating the out group. Uh THERE'S very interesting
uh developmental data that points to this. So once
you have this background, then and you've got the
tethered rationality model, the explanation, uh why we don't,
the beliefs can't be revised as the following. So
if scientists belong to the in group, then the
instincts push us in the same direction as reason
and enhance the pleasure satisfaction associated with the rational
response. If those scientists belong to the out group,
the instinct pushes us in the opposite direction from
the uh uh coherence relation, they're evil and trying
to deceive and harm us. And if the pleasure
we derive from exercising the instinct that is uh
the hostility of the out group is greater than
we derive from the rational choice, then we will
be among the vaccine hesitant. And if in addition,
the reasoning mind is used against us on top
of that to sow doubt on the motives of
the experts to accentuate group differences. For example, they
don't tell you how many people have died from
the vaccine, do they? It will be even more
difficult to overcome the instinctual bias and any information
to the contrary, no matter how clear or factual
will be less effective because it's pushing in the
opposite direction to the instinct. And so here on
this account, the same mechanisms and procedures are in
play in both the vaccinated and the vaccine hesitant.
The only difference is group membership. And, you know,
and so you don't have to postulate that they're
irrational or, you know, that there's some other uh
deficit. No, it's the same. Um, um IIII I,
it just follows from the tethered model.
Mhm. But, uh, I mean, do you think that
there are space here for people actually, uh, just
for the sake of social signaling, claiming that they
believe, or they share particular beliefs with people that
are part of their group, but then do, uh,
not actually believing them and behaving in ways that
go contrary to those beliefs? I mean, do you
think, basically what I'm asking you is if you
think there's space here for people to uh transmit
uh certain beliefs to others just to signal their
group membership but actually not uh believing that? Sure.
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. The, uh, think of, um, the,
uh, again, if you want to stick with the
vaccine example, think of, um, uh, some of the
commentators on TV, uh particularly American television, uh, you
know, they, uh, would spend, uh, you know, they
have an audience, their audience has, uh, uh uh,
you know, belongs to, uh sort of the, the
this and so what they're doing is they're playing
to the audience and they're using their rational mind
to say things that are consistent with the audience's
group membership though. They themselves may not believe that.
I mean, they're mostly vaccinated. It turns out they
were all vaccinated and to believe that, but because
uh the, the, the it was profitable for them
to actually feign that belief that they feigned it.
Um Yeah. Oh, no, that this happens a great
deal. The, the, the, the rational mind is there
and it can be utilized and uh and you
know, uh I, I it can send cues not
just to the rational mind but to all these
other systems. Um Yeah,
a and so my last question will be, and
this will probably be uh a sort of summary
of everything we've talked about here today. But we've
already, when I asked you about the implications, I
asked you specifically about why it's so hard sometimes
to change people's beliefs and constraints on belief revision.
But more generally, what would you say are the
main implications for uh how we understand human psychology
of the TEF root mind framework?
Well, I think there are some very, very significant
implications here and they, but they more have to
do with society social framework. There is a real
um uh a scary component to this sort of
model. And the reason is what I'm saying here,
what this model is saying is you cannot arbitrarily
change any behavior by changing beliefs. Uh You know,
over a week in a sensitivity training, it doesn't
mean that you cannot change problematic behaviors at all.
But to do so, you have to have an
accurate model of the systems driving the behavior and
then target those systems. And such targeting may involve
uh belief, revision, but also associative uh conditioning, pharmaceutical
invention, maybe neuronal invention and so forth. But this
idea, um um iii I it uh uh there's
an enormous fear surrounding this idea and, and I,
I can give you an example uh societal example,
sort of to illustrate that to sort of finish
off. But the uh but again, what we need
to do, I mean, in terms of this model
we're saying is we need to come to grips
with who and what we are as Homo Sapiens
and the, the critical but limited role that social
norms play in our behavior. So social norms are
important. Absolutely. But they're not everything. And I, I,
you know, I often discuss this with my students
by giving an example of stealing or cheating. OK.
So this is Homo Sapiens cheat. I mean, this
is a fundamental property of Homo Sapiens. There's a
very interesting literature on this. Now, you can imagine
two type types of societies in one type of
society. Cheating. Yeah, you shouldn't do that. But there's
not any really severe penalties and well, maybe it's
OK to cheat or steal from someone that's really
wealthy because they probably stole it from someone else.
You know, you can rationalize this and so forth.
Imagine that society and imagine, uh, a society in
which if you cheat, I'm gonna cut off your
hand. So, in those two societies you're gonna have
different levels of cheating and stealing. Right. In the
one, the first one, it might be maybe 75%
that people cheat. I, I don't know. I'm just
making up these numbers. In the second one, it
might be 25%. But in no society will, you
have 100% and 0%. And so this is what
I mean, that the, the social norms are important,
they, they sway us but they have, they're limited
also in that role. So let me uh finish
off um with, with an example, this is an
example. Uh AND it, it comes in again, why
we're so afraid of this type of model. So
this is an example that I took from uh
uh from the Canadian. Uh uh uh So in,
in 2015, our armed forces were undertaking a program
review to eliminate sexual harassment in the military. Again,
this problem again, it's not a Canadian problem, Homo
Sapiens problem. And our top general at the time,
his name was Tom Lawson and he gave an
interview to the uh Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. And he
was asked during the interview by the uh look,
it's 2015, why is this still a problem? And
the general replied, well, look, you know, this is
a difficult problem. We have a zero tolerance policy.
We are pursuing this, it disturbs the majority of,
you know, everyone in your form. And, um, he,
you know, he sort of said sort of the
right. But then he said something else. But then
he said, but, you know, this is particularly difficult
because, you know, there's a biological component to this.
We're biologically wired in a certain way. And what
do you think happened as soon as he said
that? Now, what's interesting here is that if he'd
been talking about mice or monkeys, no one would
have uh a batted an eye because what he
said is scientifically correct. But as, but his acknowledgment
of it, that sexual attraction is biologically hardwired in
humans. It resulted in an enormous public uproar. Everyone
from the Prime Minister down, condemned him for his
Neanderthal knuckle dragging views and he would have been
fired on the spot if he was, he was
not due to retire in a couple of weeks.
So he was allowed to uh uh uh stay.
And what's interesting, this is an example that uh
stayed with me when I uh saw it and
I called up some of my evolutionary psychology colleagues
and said, look what's going on here. This is
absolutely true. This is a, you know, you can't
seriously uh deny this uh in terms of the
science. Um And it's certainly consistent with the tethered
rationality model that I'm providing here. So he's not
saying that we're only driven by that, right? He's
saying it's one of the one ca component. Uh
BUT we also, you know, uh these other systems
that can, that should be able to modulate it
and he's reaffirming the social acceptability of it, uh
zero tolerance and so forth. Well, so why the
universal condemn uh nation? And I think what's going
on here and this is why we're so afraid
of this type of model is that we all
believe that behavior that harms others must be punished
and prevented, right? So this is uh again, we
can all agree on that and our legal system
makes a tight connection between rationality and responsibility. OK.
The absence of rationality is an excusing condition for
responsibility. So if behavior that harms others is attributed
to the low level biological systems, we assume that
this explanation condones the behavior and prevents punishment of
the transgressor. And this is what leads us to
deny the science and common sense. And so how
do we deal with this? Do we just, you
know, turn the other way and say, well, no,
this is not true when the science and common
sense says it is true. Well, I think, no,
I don't think that's necessarily the view the position
that we need to take. Uh This is just
a mistake. I think the most uh more productive
approach um is one to focus on prevention of
bad behavior rather than retribution. Two decouple responsibility from
rationality and three realize that accepting a tethered mind
that is accepting the contribution of these evolutionary older
systems in our behavior as the norm allows us
to bring tools other than belief, revision to the
table. Uh TOOLS such as operant conditioning, pharmaceutical interventions,
maybe neuronal implants to change behavior. It, it broadens
our repertoire. It gives us a more uh uh
effective toolbox to deal with problematic behaviors. So that's
sort of my response. But this is the fear,
this is why um um uh uh a model
like this uh independent of any uh uh sort
of scientific evidence one way or the other uh
uh to get to for the social sciences or
for society to accept it are these sort of
challenges? They're not um very significant social legal challenges.
Yeah. Mhm.
Great. So, let's send on that note then and
the book is again, reason and less pursuing food,
sex and politics. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description box of the interview and doctor
Goel just before we go apart from the book,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Ah, well, um I don't have a big presence
on the internet. They can look at my web
page. You can down and um uh I think
it's V goy dot yu dot C A. Uh
They can download my various papers. Uh They can
download, there's actually a couple of uh videos that
I have prepared for my students that I have
uploaded uh on youtube. Uh One is on tethered
Rationality that walks through uh some of this uh
story. Um I don't know the have the link
for it, but I think if you Google tethered
rationality in my name, it should come up. Uh
OK. OK, great. So I, I will be leaving
some other links to your work in the description
box of the interview as well. And thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been a real pleasure to
talk with you.
Oh, and I thank you uh Ricardo, I appreciate
it and I enjoyed it. Thank you very much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check their website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Pergo Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche, all of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitting Bear. No Wolf, Tim Hall, Erica LJ Conners,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal. And Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S
Friends, David Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear Ro Ro Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nico Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboa, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Fry Franca, Beto Lati W Cortez or Solis
Scott Zachary FTDW Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio,
Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo
David Williams, the Augusta Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior,
Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark
Kempel, Thomas, Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B brand
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perros, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla. Good enough
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers
is our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Veg
and Bernard N Corti Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz
and Nick Golden. And to my executive producers Matthew
Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you
for all.